<style>
    
    @import url('https://fonts.googleapis.com/css?family=Montserrat');
    
    @import 'https://cdn.jsdelivr.net/npm/@shoelace-style/shoelace@2.4.0/dist/components/button/button.js';
    
    #juncture { font-family: Montserrat; font-size: 20px; -hyphens: none; }
    
    #juncture h1 { font-size: 32px; color: #BF0A31; font-weight: 600; }
    
    #juncture h2 { font-size: 28px; }
    
    #juncture h3 { font-size: 24px; }
    
    #juncture h4 { text-align: center; }
    
    ul li { padding: 3px 0px; }
    
</style>

.ve-header "Lesson 2.1: Data Histories" position=top sticky background=gh:da4asandbox/cameronessay-organization/media/Activity2-1Overview.svg
    - [Homepage](https://data4all.com)
    - [All Modules](https://data4all.com/modules)
    - [Module 2](/module-2/)
    - [Lesson 2.1 Overview](#overview)
    - [↳ Goals](#goals)
    - [↳ Agenda](#agenda)
    - [↳ Readings](#readings)
    - [↳ Lesson Plan](#plan)
    - [↳ Discussion](#discussion)
    - [↳ Activity 1](#activity1)
    - [↳ Activity 2](#activity2)

# Overview {#overview}

This class introduces students to "historicizing data" - the idea that data is not simply quantifiable information, but all data has a history behind it that shaped its production. 

# Lesson Goals {#goals}

1. Establish a larger theoretical framework from *Data Feminism* to start to approach data as a historical artifact
2. Help students explore a particular form of historical data (HOLC Redlining Maps) and how social concepts and biases of race, class, and religion shaped its production.
3. Introduce students to the [Data Biography](module-2/data-biography) assignment and start to apply some of its framework to the HOLC Redlining Maps.

# Agenda {#agenda}

- Discussion: Catherine D'Ignazio and Lauren Klein, "Collect, Analyze, Imagine, Teach" (30 min.)
- Activity: HOLC Redlining Maps (30 min.)
- Activity: Data Biography of HOLC Redlining Maps (20 min.)

# Readings {#readings}

- Catherine D’Ignazio and Lauren Klein, ["Chapter 2: Collect, Analyze, Imagine, Teach"](https://data-feminism.mitpress.mit.edu/pub/ei7cogfn/release/4) from *Data Feminism* (MIT Press, 2020)

>This reading lays out some conceptual frameworks for students to think about data as a historically produced artificact. 

# Lesson Plan {#plan}

## Discussion: Catherine D'Ignazio and Lauren Klein, "Collect, Analyze, Imagine, Teach" {#discussion}

### Defining Concepts
- In small groups, try to come up with a working definition of the following concepts in your own words
    - Counterdata
    - "The Pitfalls of Proof"
    - Data Ethics vs. Data Justice
- Do you think the distinction between "data ethics" vs. "data justice" is a useful one?
- Can you think of other examples of "counterdata" that weren't mentioned in this chapter?
<br><br>

### Applying Concepts
- Look around the classroom. Take 5 minutes to brainstorm as many ideas as you can for kinds of data you might try and collect about what you see. Ex. "We could count the number of people wearing glasses."
- Each person share *one idea* with your group members. 
- As a group, choose one idea. 
- Try to apply some of the concepts discussed above in "Collect, Analyze, Imagine, Teach" to the idea:
    - Negative: How would you irresponsibly collect this data? How might that data get misused? 
    - Positive: How would you collect this data in a way that follows the principles of this chapter?
 
## Activity 1: HOLC Redlining Maps {#activity1}

>In this activity, students use an interactive mapping project, *Mapping Inequality*, which has scanned, georeferenced, and overlaid HOLC maps from the 1930s onto modern cities. These maps were referenced in the *Data Feminism* reading for this module. This allows students to zoom into different nieighborhoods and explore how this federal agency overlaid conceptions of race, class, and ethnicity onto their grading system for mortgage lending.

> Note: This activity uses Denver, Colorado, as its map, but teachers can substitute another city that might be more familiar for their students. This does require finding some suitable groupings of areas for students to zero in on.

You read a bit about the mortgage risk maps created by ==the Homeowner’s Loan Corporation (HOLC)=={Q3139614} during the 1930s. In this activity you're going to explore one of these maps. Here is some background to get you started:

<iframe src="https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/e/2PACX-1vQz3b8r1BBskqVHoRuBArX9NwD6j3c6ZbknRFyHPrAgUhslpIPX29JdqGNFsHBOQrvYp4QuUFoxQ9Kg/embed?start=false&loop=false&delayms=10000" frameborder="0" width="100%" height="550" allowfullscreen="true" mozallowfullscreen="true" webkitallowfullscreen="true"></iframe><br>

### Instructions:
1.  Open this [1938 interactive map of Denver](https://dsl.richmond.edu/panorama/redlining/#loc=11/39.71/-105.117&city=denver-co ) produced by the ==Homeowner’s Loan Corporation (HOLC)=={Q3139614}
2.  Spend a few minutes familiarizing yourself with the site and its interface. Try to get a handle on what kind of information is there and how to navigate the site. Bonus: try to find your school, home, church, favorite restaurant, etc.
3.  Locate the four areas assigned to your group by zooming and “panning” around the map. 

- Group A: A3, A4, A5, B5
- Group B: B10, C16, D7, D8
- Group C: D6, D12, D13, D15
- Group D: C19, D7, D10, D14

4.  Click on each of the areas assigned to your group and read the accompanying notes that the mapmaker recorded for that area. Focus on the following text: **1. Area Characteristics**, **2. Inhabitants** , **5. Clarifying Remarks**.

- What’s there today? *Note: If you click Map Options -> Polygons you can see the current map of Denver underneath.*
- Were they generally low or high risk? 
- What factors contributed to that grade?

.ve-iframe https://dsl.richmond.edu/panorama/redlining/#loc=12/39.71/-105.061&city=denver-co width=90%


### Debrief
- Each group (A, B, C, D) summarize some general patterns across their areas.
- Entire class: What seem to be the common factors that the mapmakers used to determine the "lending risk" of different areas of the city?
- Entire class: What do you notice about the **differences** between these areas and neighborhoods, both in the 1930s and today?

## Activity 2: Data Biography of HOLC Redlining Maps {#activity2}

Your main assignment for this module is to produce a "data biography" about a historical dataset.[^1] A "data biography" is an attempt to narrate the paritcular history of a dataset - the when, where, how, why, etc. of its production. Today, we're going to just focus on the HOLC redlining maps that you explored earlier today.

[^1]: Heather Krause provides a working definition of "data biography" in ["Data Biographies: Getting to Know Your Data"](https://gijn.org/2017/03/27/data-biographies-getting-to-know-your-data/) *Global Investigative Journalism Network* (March 27, 2017).

In small groups, navigate to the [Introduction page for the Mapping Inequality project](**https://dsl.richmond.edu/panorama/redlining/**). Draw on your own experience navigating one of the maps from the website and skim through the Introductory text to try and answer the following questions about the HOLC maps that produced in the 1930s (not the website itself):

- **What** kind of information was captured by the HOLC organization and its maps?
- **Who** originally collected this information about a city and its residents? 
- **How** did they collect this information?
- **When** did they collect this information?
- **Where** did this information come from? What was its geographical coverage?
- **Why** did they collect it? What were the motivations behind the HOLC mapmaking initiative?

.ve-footer
    - [Previous: Module Overview](/module-2/)
    - [Data 4 All icon](somelink)
    - [Next: Module 2.2](/module-2/2-2/)
